IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026 5512519
HDCGNet: A Hypergraph Dual-Branch CNN–GCN
Network for Mars Hyperspectral
Image Classiﬁcation
Anhong Tian
 , Member, IEEE, Tao Chen, Sen Lei
 , Member, IEEE, Chengbiao Fu
 , Member, IEEE,
Huaiping Jin
 , Member, IEEE, and Zhenwei Shi
 , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The hyperspectral image (HSI) classiﬁcation, as an
important research direction in the ﬁeld of remote sensing, has
made signiﬁcant progress in Earth observation. However, its
application in Mars exploration missions is still in the exploratory
stage. While convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are eﬀective
in extracting local features, their inherent local receptive ﬁeld
restricts the ability to capture long-range spatial dependencies.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a dual-branch fusion
architecture, termed HDCGNet, which seamlessly integrates
CNNs and graph convolutional networks (GCNs), and further
incorporates hypergraph learning into the GCN branch. This
design enables the extraction of both local and global information
from HSI and facilitates the eﬀective modeling of high-order
nonlinear relationships among multiple nodes. First, a cascade
processing structure is employed in the CNN feature extraction
branch to perform spectral denoising and transformation. By
leveraging depthwise separable convolution (DSC) and cross
multiscale convolution modules, the model eﬀectively captures
multiscale spatial–spectral joint features and enhances pixel-level
feature representation with diﬀerentiated receptive ﬁelds. Second,
to enrich the topological features of the HSI segmentation area,
a hypergraph is added to the GCN feature modeling branch,
while the ContraNorm normalization layer ensures a uniform
distribution of the representation space and facilitates hyperpixel-
level feature extraction. Finally, the adaptive cross-attention
Received 13 December 2025; revised 26 January 2026 and 18 March 2026;
accepted 5 April 2026. Date of publication 16 April 2026; date of current
version 13 May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 42361007, in part by Yunnan
Province Talents Project under Grant 202205AC160005, in part by Yunnan
Province Xing Dian Young Talents Project under Grant KKXX202303001,
in part by the School-Level Projects under Grant CB24069D022A and Grant
KKZ3202403177, and in part by Yunnan Provincial Science and Technol-
ogy Plan Project under Grant 202449CE340023. (Corresponding authors:
Chengbiao Fu; Huaiping Jin; Zhenwei Shi.)
Anhong Tian is with the Faculty of Information Engineering and Automa-
tion, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500,
China, also with the Faculty of Land Resources Engineering, Kunming
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China, and also
with the Yunnan Key Laboratory of Intelligent Monitoring and Spatiotemporal
Big Data Governance of Natural Resources, Kunming 650093, China (e-mail:
tah@kust.edu.cn).
Tao Chen, Chengbiao Fu, and Huaiping Jin are with the Faculty of
Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science
and Technology, Kunming 650500, China (e-mail: taochen@stu.kust.edu.cn;
fcb@kust.edu.cn; jinhuaiping@gmail.com).
Sen Lei is with the School of Information Science and Technol-
ogy, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China (e-mail:
senlei@swjtu.edu.cn).
Zhenwei Shi is with the Department of Aerospace Intelligent Science and
Technology, School of Astronautics, and the State Key Laboratory of Virtual
Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
(e-mail: shizhenwei@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGRS.2026.3684553
fusion module (ACAFM) is employed to fuse the features of the
two branches, thereby ensuring complementarity between global
and local information. Experimental results on three Mars HSI
datasets demonstrate that HDCGNet achieves better performance
than some existing methods. Our codes and data will be made
publicly available at: https://github.com/Ctao0820/HDCGNet.git
Index Terms—Convolutional neural network (CNN), deep
learning, graph convolutional network (GCN), hypergraph learn-
ing, hyperspectral image (HSI) classiﬁcation, Martian minerals.
I. I NTRODUCTION
S
INCE the 1960s, continuous advances in space probe
technology have enabled the acquisition of multisource
data from orbiters, landers, and rovers, thereby laying the foun-
dation for applying deep learning to Martian surface analysis
[1], [2]. Hyperspectral imaging technology, characterized by
hundreds of continuous spectral bands, enables accurate identi-
ﬁcation of mineral distributions on the Martian surface [3], [4],
which is crucial for investigating the geological evolution of
Mars. Recently, Martian mineralogy research has entered the
stage of multidimensional information fusion. Hyperspectral
classiﬁcation has emerged as an essential technique for inves-
tigating the geological evolution of Mars, since it provides
simultaneous access to information on mineral composition
and spatial distribution. Traditional spectral matching methods
based on distance metrics are computationally eﬃcient but are
highly susceptible to noise and mixed pixels. Consequently,
researchers have developed methods such as probabilistic mod-
els [5], unsupervised learning, and deep neural networks [6],
which have signiﬁcantly improved the recognition accuracy.
However, deep learning methods continue to encounter chal-
lenges, including the limited availability of annotated data on
Mars [7] and the high spectral similarity of Martian minerals,
which constrain the applicability of these models.
Hyperspectral data contains rich spectral and spatial infor-
mation [8], [9], [10] and has been widely used in the ﬁelds
such as agriculture [11], urban planning [12], environmental
monitoring [13], marine [14], and deep space exploration [15].
Hyperspectral image (HSI) classiﬁcation is the core technol-
ogy in these applications, as it analyzes the unique spectral
characteristics of each pixel to achieve accurate identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation of land cover types. In addition, since HSIs
usually contain hundreds of thousands to millions of pixels,
directly constructing a network with a single pixel as a graph
1558-0644 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
node will face serious computational complexity problems.
To solve this problem, the current mainstream methods use
the simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) hyperpixel seg-
mentation technique [16] to preprocess HSI, which aggregates
adjacent pixels with similar spectral features into hyperpixel
units, thereby signiﬁcantly reducing the size of the graph.
Wan et al. [17] proposed a hyperpixel generation method
based on spectral–spatial joint measurement, which combines
spectral similarity with spatial proximity to achieve adaptive
regional aggregation of HSI data, signiﬁcantly improving the
eﬃciency of subsequent graph convolution operations.
Convolutional neural network (CNN), as the most com-
monly used deep learning model [18], has proven its
eﬀectiveness in HSI classiﬁcation [19], [20]. In the devel-
opment of HSI classiﬁcation, from the early 1DCNN [21]
that focused on spectral features, to the 2DCNN [22] that
introduced spatial information, and then to the 3DCNN [23]
that jointly extracted spectral and spatial features, CNNs
have played a crucial role. Researchers have improved the
performance of CNN through a variety of innovative methods.
Zhong et al. [24] proposed an end-to-end spectral–spatial
residual network (SSRN) by incorporating a residual learning
mechanism, which can eﬀectively capture a wide range of
spectral features and spatial contextual discriminant infor-
mation in hyperspectral data. Roy et al. [25] proposed an
adaptive spectral–spatial kernel improved residual network
(A2S2K-ResNet) based on the attention mechanism, which
innovatively integrated the attention mechanism with adaptive
kernel learning and eﬀectively improved the ability to extract
discriminative spectral–spatial features. CNNs have certain key
limitations in HSI classiﬁcation: on the one hand, the local
receptive ﬁeld restricts global context modeling; on the other
hand, short-range convolution hinders the extraction of highly
discriminative spatial–spectral features.
In contrast, the graph convolutional network (GCN) gen-
eralizes the convolution operation to non-Euclidean space,
enabling eﬀective feature extraction from graph data with
arbitrary topological structures [26] and thereby making it
suitable for HSI tasks. GCN maps pixels to graph nodes
and builds edges based on spectral similarity to achieve
global spatial–spectral feature modeling. It can also use the
graph structure to alleviate overﬁtting of small samples.
Ding et al. [27] used a multiscale graph sampling and aggre-
gation network architecture (GraphSAGE) based on GCN to
extract multiscale features in layers and utilize a context-aware
mechanism to describe the importance of spatially adjacent
regions. Similarly, the attention mechanism has shown sig-
niﬁcant advantages in improving the performance of GCNs.
The graph attention network (GAT) [28] achieves dynamic
adaptive adjustment of the connection weights between nodes
by introducing the self-attention mechanism. Han et al. [29]
designed a semi-supervised classiﬁcation method based on the
multiscale spectral spatial GAT (MSSGAT), which constructs
neighborhood graphs of multiple scales, where all samples are
represented as nodes, and utilizes spectral spatial features with
diﬀerent receptive ﬁelds.
CNN is eﬀective in extracting local pixel features, whereas
GCN is capable of capturing global hyperpixel features. How-
ever, their direct fusion encounters several challenges. First,
the data structure is incompatible, which leads to informa-
tion loss during the conversion process between regular grid
features and irregular graph structures. Second, there is a
dimension mismatch problem, which increases the computa-
tional overhead during data conversion. Finally, the training
is dynamically unbalanced, and the diﬀerence in subnet-
work convergence speed aﬀects the overall performance. To
solve the above problems, Liu et al. [30] proposed a CNN-
enhanced GCN (CEGCN), which achieved deep integration of
CNN and GCN by designing a dual-path encoding–decoding
architecture. Wang et al. [23] designed and proposed a new
HGCN-MHF for HSI classiﬁcation with limited samples,
introduced a hypergraph mechanism, and achieved good small
sample classiﬁcation results. Based on the previous analysis,
we proposed a hybrid CNN–GCN network (HCGN) for HSI
classiﬁcation on Mars with limited samples.
The network architecture of this study includes a two-
branch feature extraction module: in the CNN branch, we ﬁrst
use the spectral domain denoising layer combined with 1-D
convolution to enhance the spectral features, and combine it
with deep separable convolution to reduce the amount of data.
Then, multigranularity spatial feature extraction is achieved
through the cross-scale multiconvolution module. In the GCN
branch, this study proposes a hypergraph convolutional net-
work architecture, the core of which is to deeply explore
the spatial–spectral collaborative representation capabilities
in hyperspectral data. The hypergraph is composed of three
hyperedge construction strategies. In the construction of kNN
hyperedges, SSIM is innovatively introduced as an evaluation
index. Compared with the traditional Euclidean distance, the
SSIM index can better maintain the structural characteristics of
the spectral curve and has stronger robustness to illumination
changes and noise interference. The ContraNorm normaliza-
tion layer is used in the normalization layer to propagate
hyperpixel-level features. Finally, the adaptive cross-attention
fusion module (ACAFM) is referenced, and the channel atten-
tion cross module and the spatial attention fusion module are
integrated to perform adaptive feature fusion on the dual-
branch output results. In general, the main contributions of
this article are summarized as follows.
1) To employ a depthwise separable module in the
multiscale CNN branch for preserving channel-wise
information and minimizing computational cost, and
to realize pixel-level multigranularity feature capture
through parallel processing of three convolutional ker-
nels with diﬀerent sizes.
2) To introduce a GCN branch based on spatial-domain
hierarchical map convolution, which integrates hyper-
pixel composition and a neighborhood aggregation
mechanism to eﬀectively extract region-level contextual
features, and to incorporate a ContraNorm normaliza-
tion layer for maintaining a uniform distribution in the
representation space.
3) To achieve adaptive processing of the two branches
using ACAFM, and to facilitate cross-scale comple-
mentation between the branches through the feature
alignment module.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
4) To apply the proposed model for the classiﬁcation of
Mars HSIs and to conduct mineral classiﬁcation in
selected Martian regions.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II provides a brief overview of related work. Section III
introduces the proposed HDCGNet in detail. Section IV
presents the experiments and analyzes the classiﬁcation results.
Section V draws conclusion.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. CNN-Based HSI Classiﬁcation Method
In the past decade, CNNs have made signiﬁcant progress
in the ﬁeld of HSI classiﬁcation due to their powerful
feature representation capabilities. This deep learning archi-
tecture automatically learns discriminative spatial–spectral
features through hierarchical convolution operations, chang-
ing the paradigm of traditional classiﬁcation methods.
Ma et al. [31] proposed a lightweight hybrid CNN (Lite-
HCNet) for HSI classiﬁcation, minimizing model parameters
and computational workload. Zheng et al. [32] proposed
a lightweight end-to-end attention-enhanced feature fusion
network (AeF2N) to better understand the inherent spectral
complexity and spatial variability in HSI. Dong et al. [33]
proposed an HSI classiﬁcation method based on small sam-
ple data expansion and consistency regularization, using a
designed CNN-based model to extract discriminative features
from a limited number of labeled pixel-pair features (PPFs)
and a large number of unlabeled PPFs. In addition, attention
mechanisms have been widely introduced into CNNs. For
example, many attention mechanisms, such as the hybrid
attention mechanism convolutional block attention module
(CBAM) [34] and the channel attention mechanism (ECA)
[35] have been adopted and applied. Cui et al. [36] designed
a dual-triple attention network (DTAN) based on capturing
cross-dimensional interaction information. The ECA module
was introduced into the DenseNet module to achieve partial
cross-channel interaction. Although CNN-based HSI classiﬁ-
cation methods have demonstrated excellent performance in
multiple tasks, their inherent architecture still makes it diﬃcult
to eﬀectively model the long-range dependencies between
spatial and spectral dimensions in hyperspectral data.
B. GCN-Based HSI Classiﬁcation Method
In contrast to CNNs, which mainly focus on local fea-
ture extraction, GCNs and their derivative models leverage
graph-structured data to capture long-range spatial–spectral
dependencies that CNNs fail to represent, while eﬀectively
modeling the topological relationships among spatial nodes.
Yang et al. [37] proposed a classiﬁcation model, DMSGer,
based on the GCN paradigm. They constructed a relatively
small graph at the region level based on the hyperpixel
segmentation algorithm and metric learning, and then applied
the dynamic pixel-level feature update strategy to the region-
level adjacency matrix to achieve the purpose of dynamically
learning pixel representation. Wang et al.[38] proposed a dual-
branch hybrid architecture DBMGNet that combines Mamba
and GCN, designed the band selection enhanced bidirectional
Mamba (BSEBM), and applied reparameterized Chebyshev
graph convolution (RCGC) in GCN to simulate the similar-
ity dependency in non-Euclidean space, while designing the
adjacency matrix based on the intrinsic characteristics of HSI.
Chen et al. [39] proposed an automatic graph learning con-
volutional network (Auto-GCN), which uniﬁed graph learning
and HSI classiﬁcation in a “network” manner to model the
interactions of high-order tensors. GCN can perform convolu-
tion operations on graphs of arbitrary topological structures,
convert HSI data into graph structure representations, and
model the correlation between diﬀerent land covers and HSI
spatial topologies.
C. Hypergraph Learning
GCN is mainly divided into two processing paradigms
according to the diﬀerences in task objectives: the ﬁrst is
graph-level classiﬁcation, which focuses on the global repre-
sentation of the entire graph structure; the second is node-level
classiﬁcation, which mainly focuses on the feature learning of
individual nodes in the graph. In the HSI classiﬁcation task, by
mapping pixels or hyperpixels into graph nodes and building
edge connections based on spectral–spatial similarity, it can be
converted into a node classiﬁcation problem under the GCN
framework [40]. Currently, most GCN methods regard each
pixel as a node and the spectral information of each pixel as
the node feature, thereby constructing graph data from HSI
using a speciﬁc distance measurement method. Current GCN-
based methods still have some defects. Existing methods rely
heavily on the construction of the adjacency matrix, which
represents the topological structure of graph data. However,
the adjacency matrix is basically based on prior knowledge and
cannot be updated through the learning process. In addition,
using a simple graph structure for modeling, where edges
can only represent pairwise relationships, fails to discover the
underlying complex structure in the data [41].
Based on the above problems, hypergraphs can be intro-
duced into GCN. A hypergraph is a generalized graph structure
that contains a set of vertices and hyperedges. A hyperedge
is set between multiple vertices to represent a higher order
relationship. The number of vertices is usually greater than 2.
Hypergraph learning is generalized from graph learning, and
its purpose is to analyze data by learning the information
transfer mode between hypergraph structures. Feng et al. [42]
ﬁrst proposed HGNN and introduced the spectral convolu-
tion operator on the static hypergraph. Hypergraph learning
can establish high-order correlation models between data, so
hypergraph learning can well capture the nonlinear high-
order data in HSIs. Currently, there are few studies on
the use of HGNN for HSI classiﬁcation. For example,
Duan et al. [43] proposed a structure-preserving hypergraph
convolutional network SPHGCN, which integrates local regu-
lar convolution and irregular hypergraph convolution to learn
the structured semantic features of HSI. Xu et al. [44] pro-
posed a dynamic hypergraph convolution and recursive gated
convolution fusion network for HSI classiﬁcation to learn the
hidden and important relationships represented in HSI data.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
Fig. 1. Framework of the proposed HDCGNet.
D. Dual-Branch CNN–GCN
The current HSI classiﬁcation methods based on deep
learning still have obvious limitations in feature extrac-
tion. Speciﬁcally, whether it is CNN or GCN architecture,
when only a single-layer convolutional structure is used, its
information-capturing ability will be limited by the inherent
receptive ﬁeld. For CNN-based methods, it usually constructs
the input patch by intercepting ﬁxed-size neighborhood pixels
centered on the sampling point. This processing method has
two key defects: ﬁrst, the ﬁxed-size local receptive ﬁeld
cannot adapt to the changing requirements of multiscale fea-
tures in HSI data; second, this rigid sampling strategy will
ignore the optimal feature scales unique to di ﬀerent types of
objects, resulting in poor classiﬁcation performance of some
objects with special scale characteristics. Similarly, GCN-
based methods also have signiﬁcant constraints: the network
can only learn on a predeﬁned single graph structure, and
each hyperpixel node can only aggregate the information of its
direct neighboring nodes. This local information transmission
mechanism severely limits the network’s ability to capture
long-range spatial dependencies. These limitations fundamen-
tally restrict the classiﬁcation performance of existing methods
in complex scenes, and there is an urgent need to develop a
new network architecture that can adapt to multiscale features
and eﬀectively integrate global context information.
These shortcomings prompted researchers to adopt a
dual-branch CNN–GCN network architecture design. This
architecture eﬀectively integrates the advantages of the two
networks through a carefully designed feature complementa-
tion mechanism: the CNN branch is good at extracting local
spectral–spatial features, and its hierarchical convolutional
structure can automatically learn multilevel feature represen-
tations from low-level textures to high-level semantics; while
the GCN branch focuses on modeling global topological
relationships and captures long-range spatial dependencies
between pixels through graph convolution operations. In
particular, the two branches achieve deep complementarity
through an innovative feature interaction mechanism: on the
one hand, the local features extracted by CNN provide a
reliable basis for GCN to construct neighborhood relations;
on the other hand, the global context information learned by
GCN supplements CNN with semantic associations beyond
the local receptive ﬁeld. This synergy enables the network
to adaptively process features of objects at diﬀerent scales,
enhancing global consistency while maintaining local detail
accuracy, thereby signiﬁcantly improving classiﬁcation per-
formance in complex scenarios. Compared with a single
network, this dual-branch architecture can more fully mine the
multiscale spatial–spectral information contained in HSI data.
Shi et al. [45] proposed an HCGN for HSI classiﬁcation
that combines the advantages of CNN and GCN frameworks
and can provide excellent classiﬁcation performance with
limited training samples. Zhou et al. [46] designed an attention
multihop graph and multiscale convolutional fusion network
(AMGCFN) that is conducive to the learning of multilayer
contextual semantic features. Yu et al. [47] proposed a band
selection method to collect HSI classiﬁcation discriminant
band subsets, which developed GCN and CNN to reﬁne the
band correlations sequentially. The bands selected accord-
ing to the obtained correlations were fed to the proposed
self-supervised auxiliary spectral reconstruction network for
spectral reconstruction to achieve band selection.
III. P ROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we introduce the proposed HDCGNet model
in detail. The proposed HDCGNet is a hybrid neural network
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
that performs the extraction and fusion of hyperpixel and pixel
features to characterize the spectral and spatial properties of
HSI. The constructed network mainly includes two branches.
One is the CNN branch, which is used to extract pixel-level
features, reduce computational complexity, reduce informa-
tion redundancy, optimize the network structure, and prevent
overﬁtting. The other is the GCN branch. The advantage of
this branch design is that it makes full use of the inherent
spatial topological structure and spectral characteristics within
the segmented area, constructs a multilevel feature expression
system through a hypergraph modeling method, extracts the
spatial adjacency matrix within the segmentation unit, inte-
grates the spectral similarity measure to construct hyperedge
connections, and establishes a hypergraph topological structure
with physical signiﬁcance for extracting hyperpixel-level fea-
tures. Finally, the features of the two branches are introduced
in channel attention and spatial attention for adaptive fusion.
In the following, we will describe each module in detail.
The complete architecture of our model is shown in Fig. 1.
The HSI data is ﬁrst denoised and dimensionally reduced by
the DDR module, and then pixel-level features are obtained
through the DSC module and CMC multiscale parallel in
the CNN branch. Then, from the dimensionally reduced data
and the input GCN branch after SLIC, after multistrategy
hypergraph processing, feature stability is achieved through
the ContraNorm normalization layer, and after two layers of
HGNN, hyperpixel-level features are obtained. Ultimately, the
two adaptively cross-fuse to obtain the ﬁnal output result.
A. Hypergraph Convolution Composed of Multiple
Hyperedges
In the HSI classiﬁcation task, traditional hypergraph
learning methods have certain limitations. The hyperedge
generation strategy has certain defects, lacks the ability of
other methods to generate hyperedges, relies heavily on the
kNN algorithm to construct hyperedges, pays too much atten-
tion to spectral features and ignores the spatial topological
relationship of hyperpixel regions, and fails to eﬀectively
utilize the spatial structure information provided by image
segmentation. Second, there is a problem of feature distortion.
In addition to the noise interference inherent in HSI data, the
mixed pixel eﬀect in the hyperpixel segmentation area will
cause deviations in spectral feature representation. Finally, the
hyperedge constructed solely based on spectral similarity may
misrepresent the actual spatial correlation between objects,
aﬀecting the accuracy of subsequent feature propagation.
To address the limitations of traditional hypergraph con-
struction, we propose a multistrategy hypergraph fusion
module, whose core architecture consists of three parallel
hyperedge generation strategies: pairwise hyperedges (ε pair),
k-hop hyperedges (ε hop), and kNN hyperedges (ε kNN).
The construction of the graph structure in this study begins
with the hyperpixel generation stage. The SLIC algorithm is
used to over-segment the original HSI data X∈ RH×W×C to
generate Z spatially compact and spectrally uniform hyperpixel
regions, making each hyperpixel a node in the graph structure.
Second, deﬁne the mapping matrix ( H × W) to represent the
pixel-hyperpixel correlation, where HW represents the total
number of pixels in the input image ( H ×W), Z represents the
total number of hyperpixels generated, and the matrix element
Qi, j is expressed as
Qi, j =
(
1, if Xi∈ S j
0, otherwise X = Flatten (X) (1)
where Qi, j reﬂects the relationship between the ith pixel
elementbXi and the jth hyperpixel element S j. Flatten(·) means
ﬂattening X in space. bXi represents the ith pixel in bX, and S j
represents the jth hyperpixel. We can then use the following
encoder and decoder to achieve the conversion between nodes
and hyperpixels, which are deﬁned as follows:
V = Encoder (X, Q) = ˆQT Flatten (X) (2)
ˆX = Decoder (X, Q) = Reshape (QV) (3)
where ˆQT represents the transpose of ˆQ after column normal-
ization. V represents the feature matrix of all hyperpixel nodes.
Reshape(·) represents the spatial dimension of the restored
ﬂat data. Encoder(·) represents the conversion of pixel graph
into graph nodes, and Decoder(·) represents the mapping of
hyperpixel nodes to pixels.
Based on the undirected graph structure G = (V,ε) obtained
after hyperpixel segmentation, the hypergraph is constructed.
Undirected edges are introduced to connect adjacent hyperpix-
els in the spatial distribution, and three hyperedge construction
strategies are used to build the hypergraph. The ﬁrst strategy
is to use paired hyperedges (ε pair) to directly transform all
undirected edges in the base graph into binary hyperedges, that
is, each hyperedge has only two nodes and is built based on the
direct connection edges between nodes, retaining the topologi-
cal relationship of the original graph structure, preserving local
spatial neighborhood information, and constructing low-order
neighbor edge relationships to provide a basis for high-order
relationships. The second strategy is the k-hop hyperedge
(εhop), which captures multiorder neighborhood relationships.
It takes the central node vi as the starting point and connects all
nodes in its k-hop neighborhood through k-hop path extension,
enhancing the long-range dependency modeling capability and
capturing multiscale spatial context information. The third
strategy is the k-nearest neighbor hyperedge (ε kNN), which is
constructed based on the structural similarity index (SSIM) as
a similarity metric. It constructs a hyperedge by selecting the
nodes with the greatest structural similarity in the constrained
spatial neighborhood to obtain local spectral information. It
only requires hyperpixel node information and avoids noise
interference caused by a global search. We linearly adjust
SSIM to [−1, 1] to ensure compatibility with spatial weights.
SSIM is deﬁned as
SSIM (x, y) =

l (x, y)
α
·

c (x, y)
β
·

s (x, y)
γ
(4)
where l(x,y) denotes luminance comparison, c(x,y) denotes
contrast comparison, s(x,y) denotes structural comparison, and
α, β, and γ denote structural parameters. We convert the
features of each hyperpixel pair into image format, calculate
their SSIM value, and ﬁnally return the obtained value.
After generating multiple sets of hyperedges, this module
introduces an adaptive weight function to achieve feature
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
fusion, and the fusion criterion considers both spectral fea-
ture similarity as well as spatial neighborhood distance. The
spectral similarity of the nodes vi and v j is as follows:
φspectral
 
Vi, V j

= exp
 
−
 
Fi− F j
2
2σ2
1
!
(5)
where ℓ2 is the L2 paradigm, Fi and F j denote the spectral
features of nodes Vi and V j, respectively, and σ1 is the
adjustable parameter in the feature similarity measure function.
Similarly, the spatial similarity is deﬁned as follows:
φspatial
 
Vi, V j

= exp
 
−
 
Pi− P j
2
2σ2
2
!
(6)
where Pi and P j denote the central position of the hyperpixel
nodes Vi and V j, respectively.σ2 is an adjustable parameter in
the spatial distance measurement function. A hyperedge can
connect multiple nodes. The spectral measurement weights and
spatial measurement weights of the hyperedge εk are designed
as follows:
Wspectral (εk) =
Pφspectral
 
Vi, V j

C (|εk|, 2) (7)
Wspatial (εk) =
Pφspatial
 
Vi, V j

C (|εk|, 2) (8)
where Vi, V j∈εk and i , j,|εk| denotes the number of nodes
in the hyperedge, and C(|εk|, 2) denotes the number of combi-
nations of two diﬀerent elements selected from the hyperedge.
Finally, the weights of the hyperedge εk are calculated as
follows:
Wspa-spe (εk) = min
 
Wspectral (εk), Wspatial (εk)

(9)
where the minimization criterion min(·) determines the ﬁnal
weight of the hyperedge, which implements a double con-
straint mechanism, and the weight converges to 1 only when
both spatial proximity and spectral similarity are satisﬁed, and
this design has good robustness against outliers of a single
mode. The measure of similarity between [0, 1] is ensured by
the RBF kernel function, which helps to control the weight of
the hyperedge.
Compared with traditional GCN, the hypergraph CNN
(HGNNConv) has signiﬁcant advantages in graph data pro-
cessing, especially in dealing with higher order associations
and unpaired relations. Traditional GCNs can only handle
binary edges, i.e., node pairs. This binary edge is only
applicable to second-order neighborhood aggregation, but
HGNNConv supports hyperedges, i.e., the ability to connect
2 and more nodes, which enables higher order interaction
modeling. One of the hypergraph Laplace operators is
L = I− D
− 1
2
v HWD−1
e HT D
− 1
2
v (10)
where Dv is the node degree matrix, De is the hyperedge
degree matrix, and W is the hyperedge weight matrix, which
supports spectral domain analysis of higher order relations.
HGNNConv represents a spatial convolution method applied
to hypergraphs, which is used in this study.
Given a hypergraph G = (V,ε, W) that aggregates fea-
tures from neighboring vertices, the central vertex feature
Fig. 2. Illustration of how ContraNorm solves dimensionality collapse.
HGNNConv is updated in a single phase to achieve feature
propagation through two phases: vertex aggregation hyperedge
and hyperedge update of new vertices, where |V| is the
number of vertices, |ε| is the number of hyperedges, and the
matrix H ∈ R|V|×|ε| represents the neighbor relationship in
the hypergraph, which is deﬁned as follows:
H (v, e) =
(
1, if v∈ e
0, if v < e
where v∈ e represents the vertex v connected by the hyperedge
e, and the vertex neighbor set Nv(e) represents all nodes
connected by the hyperedge e. In the ﬁrst stage, the hyperedge
feature of the lth layer can be expressed as
Yl = WD−1
e HT Vl (11)
where Vl denotes the hyperpixel vertex feature as input to
the lth convolutional layer and W denotes the weight matrix
of the hyperedge Wspe-spa. Similarly, in the second stage, the
updated vertex feature Vl+1 of the lth layer as the output can
be expressed as
Vl+1 =σ
 
D−1
v HY lΘl
. (12)
In this way, the matrix format of HGNNConv can be
combined into a single formula
Vl+1 =σ
 
D−1
v HWD−1
e HT VlΘl
. (13)
The frequency-domain-based HGNNConv is deﬁned as
follows:
Vl+1 =σ

D
− 1
2
v HWD−1
e HT D
− 1
2
v VlΘl

. (14)
This study consists of two HGNNConv layers. Each
layer adopts the multistrategy hypergraph fusion mechanism
described in the formula. The feature dimension is 128. When
a hyperedge only connects two nodes (ε pair), HGNNConv can
be regarded as a special case of GCN.
B. ContraNorm Normalization Layer
To address the degradation of feature dimensionality in
deep networks and maintain the uniform distribution of
the representation space, and handle related issues such
as over-smoothing that occur in HGNNConv, we adopt a
nearly zero-overhead normalization layer design that implicitly
contrasts the learning objectives to maintain the uniform dis-
tribution of the representation space and alleviate the key issue
of feature dimensionality collapse. Dimensionality collapse
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
refers to the fact that node features tend to be similar in deep
networks and lose their discriminability, which is manifested
as a decrease in the rank of the feature matrix. Deep stacking
of layers will lead to indistinguishable representations and
signiﬁcant performance degradation, resulting in the occur-
rence of over-smoothing problems. By deeply analyzing the
common characteristics of over-smoothing and representation
collapse, a theoretical connection between the two is estab-
lished. In addition, ContraNorm not only enhanced the feature
discrimination ability of hypergraph nodes in this task, but
also stabilized the high-order feature propagation process. An
illustration of how ContraNorm solves dimensionality collapse
is shown in Fig. 2.
The implementation of traditional uniformity loss relies on
indirect optimization of model parameters, while the advantage
of ContraNorm is that it transforms it into direct optimization
of the representation itself. To achieve this goal, we ﬁrst
reformulate the uniformity loss at the training objective level
as a representation constraint at the architecture level. Each
node hi∈ Rd in a fully connected graph structure G = (V,ε)
corresponds to a representation vector of a sample. Inspired
by the uniformity loss Luniform in contrastive learning, it is
generalized to a global loss function on the graph node
representation
ˆLuniform =
X
i∈V
log
0
@X
j∈V
e
hT
i h j
τ
1
A. (15)
Taking the derivative of Luniform for the node representation
∂ ˆLuniform
∂hi
=
X
j
exp

hT
i h j
τ

P
kexp

hT
i hk
τ
 h j
τ +
X
j
exp

hT
i h j
τ

P
kexp
 hT
j hk
τ
 h j
τ. (16)
Let the feature matrix be H, and H > i in the ith row. We
can rewrite the above formula into matrix form
∂ ˆLuniform
∂hi
=
 
D−1A + AD−1
H/τ, (17)
where A = exp(HH T/τ) and D denotes the diagonal degree
matrix of A, with Dii =P
j Ai j.
In order to maintain the stability of the representation, the
choice is to use layer normalization to maintain the feature
scale. The updated form of LayerNorm is
LayerNorm (hi) =γ·
hi− mean (hi)√Var(hi) +ε

+β (18)
where γ and β are learnable parameters, ε = 10−5. The
learnable parameters γ and β can rescale the representation
hi to help alleviate the problem. Appending LayerNorm to H
with a single-step gradient descent update yields
Ht = LayerNorm

Hb− s
τ × softmax
 
HbHT
b

Hb

(19)
where Hb and Ht represent the representation before and
after the update, respectively, and s is the step size of the
gradient descent. Applying layer normalization to the repre-
sentation matrix H means applying layer normalization to all
Fig. 3. CAFM structure diagram.
its components h1,..., hn, which allows ContraNorm to reduce
the uniformity loss of the representation, thereby helping to
alleviate dimensionality collapse.
C. Adaptive Cross-Attention Fusion Module
In order to balance and promote the deep feature fusion
of the two subnetworks, we use the ACAFM to process the
two subnetworks. It uses cross-channel and spatial attention
mechanisms to highlight salient features and enhance fea-
ture interactions between subnetworks, and maps the fused
features to the ﬁnal classiﬁcation output through a fully
connected layer. The model uses the focal loss function to
ensure balanced training of the two subnetworks. The cross-
attention fusion module (CAFM) structure is shown in Fig. 3.
ACAFM consists of two parts: the channel attention cross
module and the spatial attention fusion module. The features
extracted by the CNN branch and the GCN branch are input
separately, where global max pooling and average pooling are
performed, and then they are placed in two layers of neural
networks. The two obtained features are added together, passed
through an activation function, to obtain the channel weights.
Subsequently, the two fused features after spatial attention
fusion are multiplied by the input features to obtain the fused
features. Finally, an adaptive mechanism is added, and the
fused features of the two parts are output through the fully
connected layer.
CAFM consists of two parts: a channel attention cross
module and a spatial attention fusion module. For the fea-
tures Fc ∈ RC×H×W from the two branches, they are ﬁrst
compressed along the spatial dimension by global maximum
pooling (MaxPool) and global average pooling (AvgPool) to
obtain two channel description vectors with the shape of
C × 1 × 1, and extract pixel-level local features. Subsequently,
these two description vectors are fed into a shared two-
layer neural network (MLP), where the features of the two
subnetworks are globally averaged and pooled, respectively,
to generate channel description vectors. The channel weight
is calculated by a shared two-layer MLP with ReLU activation,
and the formula is
Mc =σ
 
MLP
 
AvgPool(F)

+ MLP (MaxPool (F))

(20)
where σ(·) denotes the Sigmoid function used to normalize
the weights to the range [0, 1].
The channel weights Mc
T and Mc
H of the features Tout and
Hout in the two subnets are obtained by the above method, and
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
the characterization after the channel attention cross module
is as follows:
T c = Softmax (Mcross ) Tout (21)
Hc = Softmax
 
MT
cross

Hout (22)
Mcross = Mc
T
 
Mc
H
T
(23)
where Mcross is the cross matrix of size C × C obtained by
multiplying Tout and Hout. This matrix quantiﬁes the correla-
tion between the channels of the two subnetworks, with larger
values indicating greater channel feature complementarity.
After Softmax normalization of the crossover matrix, for the
fused features F s∈ RC×H×W output from the channel attention
module, we use a two-path pooling strategy to obtain the spa-
tial attention cues. Speciﬁcally, we perform global MaxPool
and average pooling along the channel dimension to obtain
two spatial description maps of size 1 × H × W, which are
then concatenated to obtain enhanced spatial characterization.
Then, the weight coeﬃcients Ms are obtained by applying
a shared convolutional layer with a kernel size of 3 × 3, as
follows:
Ms = f 3×3 
AvgPool(F)⊕ MaxPool (F)

(24)
where f 3×3 denotes a convolutional layer with a kernel of
3 × 3.
Similarly, we can obtain the spatial weight coeﬃcients Ms
T
and Ms
H for the features Tout and Hout. By multiplying Ms
T
and Ms
H with the corresponding input features, we obtain the
fused features. In addition, we add residual connections to the
fusion module to retain the original features while reinforcing
the key regions. The speciﬁc formulation is as follows:
T s = Softmax (MT ) Tout + Tout (25)
Hs = Softmax (MH) Hout + Hout. (26)
We introduce adaptive adjustment in the output section. The
fusion features T s and Hs of the two parts are adaptively
combined through a fully connected layer, and the ﬁnal output
Y is expressed as
Y = Softmax (W (αT s⊕ (1−α) Hs) + B) (27)
where W and B represent the weights and bias of the fully
connected output layer, respectively, and the parameter α is
constrained within the range [0, 1]. By default, α = 0.5. It
combines the outputs of CNN and GCN, fuses the weights α
to balance the features of CNN and GCN, and activates them
through Softmax(·).
Unlike the natural image task, the ACAFM in this study
achieves adaptive alignment and complementarity of global
topological features and local spectral–spatial features through
dynamic weight learning.
In order to alleviate the category imbalance problem, the
original cross-entropy loss is replaced by focal loss, which
eﬀectively addresses the common long-tailed distribution prob-
lem in HSI classiﬁcation, improves the classiﬁcation accuracy
for small categories, and alleviates the category imbalance
issue. The principle of focal loss is as follows:
LFocal =−
NX
i=1
CX
j=1
α j (1− pt)γ log pt (28)
Fig. 4. (a) Standard 2-D convolution and (b) depthwise convolution.
where α j denotes the category weight, γ is the focusing
parameter, and pt represents the predicted probability that the
ith sample pi belongs to the jth category.
D. Depthwise Separable Convolution (DSC)
CNN has gradually become the mainstream method in HSI
classiﬁcation tasks due to its excellent local feature extraction
ability. However, HSIs have the characteristics of a large
number of bands and rich information, which makes the tra-
ditional neural network model based on standard convolution
often face the problem of too many parameters. In order to
build a lighter network architecture, we use DSC to realize
local feature extraction of HSIs. The structure consists of two
parts: depthwise convolution and pointwise convolution. We
set up two depth-separable convolutional blocks, each with
128 channels. Given an input feature map of size h × w × l,
where h and w represent the spatial dimensions, and l is
the number of spectral channels. The point convolution is
then performed through n 1 × 1 × l convolution kernels to
eﬀectively model the nonlinear correlation between diﬀerent
spectral channels. Fig. 4 shows a schematic of conventional
2-D convolution and depthwise convolution.
Standard 2-D convolution uses n convolution kernels with
a size of k × k (k> 1) and a channel number of l to perform
spatial–spectral joint feature extraction on the input feature
map. The ﬁnal calculation amount is
Cstd = h· w· k2· n· l (29)
where l is a loss function used to assess the diﬀerences
between the predicted SLIC data and the ground truth. Depth-
wise convolution is a part of DSC, which uses l convolution
kernels of size k × k and single channel to perform spatial
convolution on each spectral channel of the input feature
independently and then concatenates the results to output a
feature map of h × w × l. The computational cost is
Cdw = h· w· k2· l. (30)
Pointwise convolution uses n 1 × 1 × l convolution kernels
to fuse the features of diﬀerent channels. The amount of
calculation is
Cpw = h· w· n· l. (31)
Therefore, the total computational eﬀort of DSC is
Cdsc = Cdw + Cpw = h· w· k2· l + h· w· n· l. (32)
Compared with conventional 2-D convolution, the computa-
tional complexity of depth-separable convolution is
Cdsc
Cstd
= 1
n + 1
k2. (33)
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
From the above formula, it can be concluded that DSC
reduces the amount of computation compared to conventional
2-D convolution and can improve the running time of the
model.
E. Other Modules
HSI data, due to its rich spectral information, has a dual
nature: compared to multispectral imagery, its dense spectral
features can signiﬁcantly improve object classiﬁcation accu-
racy; however, this information is often mixed with noise
interference, which not only can aﬀect classiﬁcation accuracy
but also imposes a huge computational burden. To this end, we
adopt a dual 1 × 1 convolutional layer architecture. Through
BatchNorm and LeakyReLU activation, it simultaneously
achieves data denoising and feature dimensionality reduction.
This approach eﬀectively reduces the model’s parameter count
while signiﬁcantly enhancing the system’s robustness and
operational stability. This module is called denoising and
dimensionality reduction (DDR).
To enhance the feature extraction capability of the CNN-
based network, we adopt a composite multiscale convolution
(CMC) module, which includes three parallel branches with
kernel sizes of 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7. This multiscale design
is dedicated to generating rich pixel-level features. The CMC
comprises two independent multiscale convolutional layers,
each containing three convolutional blocks (ConvBlocks) with
distinct receptive ﬁelds. After each multiscale convolutional
layer, the features extracted from diﬀerent kernel sizes are
concatenated to facilitate cross-scale feature fusion.
Within each k × k ConvBlock, a batch normalization (BN)
layer is ﬁrst applied to normalize the data distribution, thereby
accelerating training and mitigating overﬁtting. To reduce the
spectral dimensionality of the high-dimensional features, a
1 × 1 convolutional layer is introduced after BN for feature
transformation and parameter reduction. A LeakyReLU acti-
vation function is then applied to introduce nonlinearity. To
further alleviate information redundancy, ease optimization,
and suppress overﬁtting, an average pooling layer is incor-
porated. This pooling operation uses a 3 × 3 window with a
stride of 1 and padding of 1 to preserve the spatial resolution
of the feature maps. Finally, a 2-D CNN with a k × k kernel
is employed to extract local spatial features
Xl
i, j =σ
 k−1X
h=0
k−1X
w=0
Wl
h,wXl−1
i+h, j+w + Bl
i, j
!
(34)
where Xl
i, j represents the output feature of the lth layer at the
spatial position (i, j), Wl
h,w represents the weight of the kernel,
Xl−1
i+h, j+w represents the input feature of the lth layer after
the spatial position ( i + h, j + w) average pooling operation,
Bl
i, j is the bias, and the ﬁnal activation function σ(·) is the
LeakyReLU(·) of ConvBlock.
The workﬂow of HDCGNet is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 HDCGNet
Fig. 5. HC dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) Ground-truth map.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Datasets, Parameter Settings, and Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed method,
we employed three Mars hyperspectral datasets 1 to validate
the proposed method, which include scenes from Holden
Crater (HC), Nili Fossae (NF), and Utopia Planitia (UP). The
data were acquired by the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging
Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) on the Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter (MRO). CRISM data have a high spatial resolution
of 18 m/pixel and include 544 spectral bands ranging from
0.36 to 3.93 µm, which are particularly suitable for mineral
detection on the Martian surface.
1) Holden Crater: HC is known for its ﬂuvial geological
evolution, although the details of this evolution, such as water
level changes and timing, remain unclear. The HC dataset
consists of 418 × 595 pixels, and 440 bands are retained
after ﬁltering out water absorption and noise spectra. The
false-color image and ground-truth image of the HC dataset
are shown in Fig. 5, which contains six mineral categories:
analcime, plagioclase, prehnite, high-ca pyroxene, serpentine,
and margarite. The category name, detailed sample number,
and labeled color are given in Table I.
2) Nili Fossae: NF is unique in that it contains addi-
tional mineral phases such as carbonates and serpentine,
which indicates the possibility of hydrothermal activity—an
important factor for the possible occurrence of biological
activity on Mars. The NF dataset has a size of 478 × 593
pixels and includes 425 bands after discarding several noisy
1Available: https://doi.org/10.57760/sciencedb.19732
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
TABLE I
CATEGORY NAMES AND SAMPLE NUMBERS IN THE HC D ATASET
Fig.
6. NF dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) Ground-truth map.
TABLE II
CATEGORY NAMES AND SAMPLE NUMBERS IN THE NF D ATASET
channels.
The false-color image and ground-truth image of
the NF dataset are shown in Fig. 6, which mainly contains
nine mineral categories: fe-olivine, epidote, chlorite, bassan-
ite, illite/muscovite, mg-carbonate, plagioclase, prehnite, and
serpentine. The category name, detailed sample number, and
labeled color are given in Table II.
3) Utopia Planitia: UP is the landing site of the Tianwen-1
Mars rover Zhurong, located in the southern part of UP.
This area is one of the largest impact basins in the solar
system and has important scientiﬁc exploration value. The
spatial resolution of this dataset is 478 × 595, containing 432
bands. The false-color image and ground-truth image of the
UP dataset are shown in Fig. 7. There are nine main mineral
classiﬁcations. The class name, detailed sample number, and
labeled color are given in Table III.
Furthermore, for each category of each dataset, we create
a mask to select pixels belonging to that category, extract the
spectral data of these pixels, calculate the average spectrum,
and plot the average spectrum curve for each dataset. Fig. 8
Fig. 7. UP dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) Ground-truth map.
TABLE III
CATEGORY NAMES AND SAMPLE NUMBERS IN THE UP D ATASET
shows the analysis results of the average spectral reﬂectance
curves of mineral categories in the three datasets. Through
in-depth analysis of spectral features, it can be found that
although these diﬀerent minerals have essential diﬀerences in
genesis and composition, their spectral curves show obvious
similarity characteristics. The signiﬁcant interclass similarity
in this high-dimensional feature space will not only lead to a
decrease in the discrimination ability of traditional classiﬁca-
tion algorithms, but will also greatly increase the complexity
requirements of the classiﬁcation model, thereby signiﬁcantly
increasing the technical diﬃculty of the hyperspectral mineral
classiﬁcation task. For these three datasets, di ﬀerent colors in
each dataset represent diﬀerent minerals.
We adopt the multi-index weighted fusion method to cal-
culate the band importance by comprehensively considering
four indicators: interclass statistical separability, variance dif-
ference, information gain, and band correlation. By calculating
the band importance of the three datasets, we discovered
a signiﬁcant common pattern: the most distinctive bands
of all datasets are concentrated in the long-wave region
(2.3–3.9 µm). Speciﬁcally, the important band range of the
Holden dataset is 374–439, which is consistent with its paleo-
lacustrine environment. Lacustrine sediments typically contain
complex combinations of altered minerals and require a wider
spectral range for eﬀective distinction. The important band
range of the NiliFossae dataset is 398–424, which may reﬂect
the geological feature dominated by carbonate minerals in
this area. The important band range of the Utopia dataset is
395–431, which is consistent with the mixed mineral environ-
ment of its impact basin. We placed the most distinctive bands
of each dataset in Fig. 9.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
Fig. 8. Mean spectrum curve. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
TABLE IV
KEY PARAMETERS AND THEIR CONFIGURATIONS
During the experiment, we used the following key parame-
ters. Table IV lists the parameters we employed. This article
selects three evaluation indicators: overall accuracy (OA),
average accuracy (AA), and kappa statistic (kappa) to evaluate
the experimental results.
B. Comparative Experiment
To verify the eﬀectiveness of the proposed HDCGNet, we
conducted a comparative analysis with the established CNN-
based spectral–spatial classiﬁers. The more classic HybridSN
Fig. 9. Most distinguishable bands in the dataset. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
[48] and A2S2K-ResNet [25] that use the attention mechanism
of CNN are used for comparison, and AMGCFN [46] based on
the attention mechanism of GCN is also selected. Second, we
also analyzed the performance of transformer-based models
such as SSFTT [49] and SPFormer [50], which focus on
global information extraction. In addition, the dual-branch
model CEGCN [30] and MCTGCL [7] are also compared.
Finally, we also selected the currently popular MambaHSI
[51] based on the Mamba model and SSEFN [52] based on
the small sample model for comparative experiments. For the
training process, ten samples were randomly selected from
each category. To ensure the reliability of our experimental
results, ten independent runs were performed for each method
and dataset, and the AA and standard deviation are reported
in Tables V–VII. The highest accuracy of each row is marked
in bold to facilitate easier comparison and interpretation of the
results.
To ensure fairness, all experiments were conducted using the
publicly available codes of the relevant authors. Tables V–VII
record the classiﬁcation results of our HDCGNet model and
other comparison models on the HC, NF, and UP datasets.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF VARIOUS METHODS ON THE HC D ATASET (%)
TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF VARIOUS METHODS ON THE NF D ATASET (%)
TABLE VII
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF VARIOUS METHODS ON THE UP D ATASET (%)
Figs. 10–12 show the classiﬁcation graphs of diﬀerent models
on the three datasets. From the experimental results on the
three benchmark Mars HSI datasets, we can draw the follow-
ing observations.
1) Comparative Analysis: For fair comparison, all HSI
classiﬁcation methods are run on the same training set and
test set. The divided training set, validation set, and test set
are shown in Tables I–III. Since the HC dataset has a higher
spatial resolution, more retained bands, and relatively fewer
categories, its classiﬁcation accuracy is relatively higher than
that of other datasets. According to the results reported in
Table IV, the accuracy of HDCGNet is signiﬁcantly higher
than that of other methods. Among them, HDCGNet has the
highest OA, reaching 93.81%, which is 9.77% (HybridSN),
2.84% (A 2S2K-ResNet), 5.88% (CEGCN), 13.38% (SSFTT),
3.49% (SPFormer), 1.97% (MambaHSI), 5.10% (SSEFN),
3.01% (AMGCFN), and 1.73% (MCTGCL) higher than other
methods. In addition, AA and Kappa of HDCGNet are also
signiﬁcantly improved.
Although the NiliFossae dataset has a high spatial resolu-
tion, the irregular distribution of objects and the overlapping
categories make classiﬁcation di ﬃcult, and the classiﬁca-
tion accuracy is at a lower level compared with other
datasets. According to the results reported in Table V, the
accuracy of HDCGNet is signiﬁcantly higher than that of
other methods. Among them, HDCGNet has the highest
OA, reaching 89.85%, which is 8.39% (HybridSN), 3.56%
(A2S2K-ResNet), 3.31% (CEGCN), 23.32% (SSFTT), 0.71%
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
Fig. 10. Classiﬁcation diagrams obtained by various algorithms on the HC
dataset. (a) HC dataset. (b) Ground-truth. (c) HDCGNet. (d) MCTGCL.
(e) AMGCFN. (f) SSEFN. (g) MambaHSI. (h) SPFormer. (i) SSFTT.
(j) CEGCN. (k) A 2S2K-ResNet. (l) HybridSN.
Fig. 11. Classiﬁcation diagrams obtained by various algorithms on the NF
dataset. (a) NF dataset. (b) Ground-truth. (c) HDCGNet. (d) MCTGCL.
(e) AMGCFN. (f) SSEFN. (g) MambaHSI. (h) SPFormer. (i) SSFTT.
(j) CEGCN. (k) A 2S2K-ResNet. (l) HybridSN.
(SPFormer), 4.25% (MambaHSI), 3.12% (SSEFN), 3.06%
(AMGCFN), and 8.65% (MCTGCL) higher than other meth-
ods. In addition, AA and kappa of HDCGNet are also
signiﬁcantly improved.
The UP dataset has a high spatial resolution, and the
smooth and regular distribution of objects makes classiﬁcation
simple and has a high classiﬁcation accuracy. Accord-
ing to the results reported in Table VI, the accuracy of
HDCGNet is signiﬁcantly higher than that of other meth-
ods. Among them, HDCGNet has the highest OA, reaching
90.49%, which is 3.45% (HybridSN), 1.14% (A2S2K-ResNet),
3.62% (CEGCN), 3.19% (SSFTT), 0.10% (SPFormer), 0.26%
(MambaHSI),2.44% (SSEFN), 3.02% (AMGCFN), and 3.95%
(MCTGCL) higher than other methods. In addition, the AA
and kappa of HDCGNet are also signiﬁcantly improved.
2) Comparative Analysis: The visual comparison of the
classiﬁcation results is shown in Figs. 10–12. The existing
classiﬁcation models generally have obvious misclassiﬁcation
phenomena. There are a large number of discrete misclassiﬁed
pixels within each category area. Second, the boundaries of
the transition area between categories are unclear. In addi-
tion, some ground object categories are seriously confused.
In contrast, the HDCGNet method proposed in this article
shows signiﬁcant advantages on all test datasets: the number
of misclassiﬁed pixels in the classiﬁcation result map is
the least; the consistency within each category area is the
Fig. 12. Classiﬁcation diagrams obtained by various algorithms on the UP
dataset. (a) UP dataset. (b) Ground-truth. (c) HDCGNet. (d) MCTGCL.
(e) AMGCFN. (f) SSEFN. (g) MambaHSI. (h) SPFormer. (i) SSFTT.
(j) CEGCN. (k) A 2S2K-ResNet. (l) HybridSN.
highest; the boundaries between classes are the clearest. These
visual qualitative analysis results are highly consistent with
the quantitative evaluation indicators in Tables V–VII. The
classiﬁcation map is obviously less noisy and smoother, which
proves the superiority of our method.
3) Comparative Model Analysis: The CNN-based HSI clas-
siﬁcation models (i.e., HybridSN and A 2S2K-ResNet) show
excellent performance on the three datasets because they fully
utilize the local spatial–spectral features of HSI. The GCN-
based HSI classiﬁcation model (i.e., AMGCFN) achieves
excellent performance on diﬀerent HSI data, captures nonlocal
spatial dependencies, and eﬀectively handles irregular ground
object distribution. The transformer-based HSI classiﬁcation
models (i.e., SSFTT and SPFormer) focus on global infor-
mation extraction. The dual-branch HSI classiﬁcation models
(i.e., CEGCN and MCTGCL) are mainly due to their eﬀective
exploration of the local and global spatial–spectral features
of HSI by combining CNN and GCN or transformer dual-
branch parallel processing. The HSI classiﬁcation model based
on Mamba (i.e., MambaHSI) mainly integrates spatial and
spectral information by leveraging its excellent long-range
modeling capabilities. The HSI classiﬁcation model for small
samples (i.e., SSEFN) enhances feature discrimination ability
and learns with fewer samples. The HDCGNet method pro-
posed in this article aggregates the spatial and spectral features
of HSI to further improve the classiﬁcation performance.
C. Experimental Settings
To maximize the eﬀectiveness of the proposed network, we
implemented a detailed experimental conﬁguration. We set the
total number of training sets to 500, the number of hyperpixel
nodes to 500, and the learning rate to 0.0005, following
standard practice. All experimental results are calculated on
the basis of the average of the results after ten independent
runs of randomly selected initial training samples.
1) Sample Size: In order to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of
the proposed method under diﬀerent labeled samples, we
randomly selected 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 annotated samples and
conducted ten experiments. Under the same circumstances, we
found that ten annotated samples had the best OA value, so
this article uniformly chose to use ten annotated samples for
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
Fig. 13. OA (%) of diﬀerent methods on three datasets with diﬀerent numbers
of labeled samples. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
Fig. 14. OA rate (%) of diﬀerent methods on three datasets with a larger
number of labeled samples.
experiments. The average OA in the three datasets is shown
in Fig. 13. In addition, we have also added experiments with
larger sample sizes with annotations, setting 1%, 5%, 10%, and
20% of the total sample size, respectively. This also proves
that the advantages of HDCGNet do not merely stem from
an extremely low data volume environment, but rather from a
scalable and robust model. The average OA on the three sets
of datasets is shown in Fig. 14.
2) λ: In order to determine the optimal segmentation scale
and evaluate the impact of the partition size of SLIC, we keep
other parameters unchanged and make λ systematically vary
in the range of [100, 300, 500, 700, 1000]. Fig. 15 shows
the hyperpixel images of the three datasets when λ = 500.
Speciﬁcally, a larger scale will produce a smaller graph,
resulting in fewer hyperpixel nodes and larger hyperpixels,
which can suppress noise. On the contrary, a smaller scale will
produce a larger graph composed of small hyperpixels with
noise. Fig. 16 shows the relationship between the segmentation
scale and OA. When the segmentation scale λ of the three
datasets is set to 500, 300, and 700, respectively, the OA value
is the highest. In order to maintain relative fairness in the
experimental results of this article, λ is uniformly set to 500.
3) K: In order to determine the optimal number of neighbor
nodes, K varies in the range of [3, 6, 9, 12, 15]. As shown
in Fig. 17, the relationship between OA and the number of
neighbor nodes. When the K value is equal to 12, the OA of
the HC dataset reaches the highest; for the NF dataset, in the
range of [6, 9, 12, 15], OA has an upward trend. For the UP
dataset, when the number of neighbor nodes is in the range of
Fig. 15. Hyperpixel image with λ = 500. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
Fig. 16. OA under diﬀerent λ values on each dataset.
[3, 6, 9, 12, 15], OA is relatively insensitive, and the node is
selected in the 2-hop neighbor, and the coverage space range
is not large, so its decline will not be much lower than the
optimal OA. After comprehensive consideration, the K values
of the three datasets are set to 12, 15, and 9, respectively.
4) Epoch: We use ﬁve diﬀerent training epochs ranging
from 100 to 500 to evaluate the performance of our pro-
posed HDCGNet method. Fig. 18 shows the classiﬁcation
performance of our HDCGNet method with diﬀerent training
times on the three datasets. We can see that with the increase
in the number of iterations, the OA of HDCGNet on the
three datasets shows an upward trend. Moreover, HDCGNet
converges with the increase in training epochs, and ﬁnally
reaches 93.81%, 89.85%, and 90.52% OA values at 500 epochs
on the three datasets, respectively. Since the training time tends
to increase with the increase in epochs, we set the training
epoch of HDCGNet to 500 to balance the training time and
performance. In order to avoid unfair comparison, considering
the undertraining of the compared models, we set the training
epoch of the compared methods to 500.
5) Learning Rate: In this section, we study the eﬀects of
diﬀerent learning rate settings on the proposed HDCGNet.
The learning rate determines the model’s convergence and
convergence eﬃciency. Several commonly used learning rate
settings are empirically tested and qualitatively compared on
three datasets. The experimental results of diﬀerent learning
rate settings on the three datasets are shown in Fig. 19. We
can see that when the learning rate is 0.05, the OA of the three
datasets is extremely low, and as the learning rate decreases,
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
TABLE VIII
ABLATION CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED METHOD ON HC, NF, AND UP D ATASETS (%)
Fig.
17. OA under diﬀerent K values on each dataset.
the OA tends to increase continuously. Therefore, we set the
learning rate to 0.0005 to report all experimental results.
D. Ablation Experiment
As described in Section III, the proposed method mainly
consists of the DSC module, the ContraNorm normalization
layer (hereinafter referred to as CN), and CAFM feature
fusion. To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of each component, we
conducted ablation studies on these speciﬁc modules, and the
hardware used for training was the NVIDIA GeForce RTX
4090 GPU.
First, we deﬁne a baseline network that excludes DSC, CN,
and ACAFM. The baseline consists of a CNN-based branch for
local feature extraction and a GCN-based branch for parallel
processing of global features. Then, we gradually add DSC
and CN by replacing the existing modules in the baseline
with these components. Finally, we fuse ACAFM to form the
ﬁnal complete architecture. The four experimental cases are
as follows.
Case 1: Network without DSC, CN, and ACAFM.
Case 2: Network without CN and ACAFM.
Case 3: Network without ACAFM.
Case 4: Network including DSC, CN, and ACAFM.
For each class, we randomly select ten labeled samples and
conduct ten experiments independently. TableVIII summarizes
the average classiﬁcation performance of the three datasets
as well as the standard deviation. Undoubtedly, the best
results of OA, AA, and Kappa are highlighted in bold. It
is obvious from Table VIII that our proposed DSC, CN,
and ACAFM can signiﬁcantly improve OA, AA, and Kappa.
Speciﬁcally, DSC eﬀectively captures the local features of
HSI with its lower complexity. ContraNorm helps generate
more evenly distributed features by directly applying losses to
the graph node representation. Meanwhile, ACAFM extracts
spectral–spatial features from the pixel level and hyperpixel
level, respectively, through relatively parallel multiscale con-
volutional subnetworks and graph node subnetworks, and
performs feature fusion, thereby comprehensively capturing
the multilevel contextual semantic features of HSIs.
In addition, in the HC dataset, we conducted ablation
experiments for three hyperedge composition strategies. Each
of these strategies was deleted separately to showcase the
contribution of each strategy. The ablation results are shown
in Table IX.
E. Comparative Analysis of kNN Hyperedge Composed of
SSIM
To demonstrate that SSIM can comprehensively reﬂect the
statistical dependence and structural consistency of spectral
shapes, we use SSIM similarity and compare it with Euclidean
distance, cosine similarity, and Manhattan distance to construct
the hyperedge of kNN.
SSIM maintains the structural correlation of features within
the neighborhood, which helps to maintain spatial continuity
and local consistency in the construction of hypergraphs. The
Euclidean distance only measures the amplitude diﬀerence
between two eigenvectors and is highly sensitive to scale and
illumination changes. In Mars hyperspectral data, it is easily
aﬀected by noise and reﬂection intensity. Cosine similarity
measures the directional consistency but ignores the local
intensity and contrast information. It measures the sum of the
absolute diﬀerences of spectral features in each dimension,
emphasizing the consistency of the overall contour of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
TABLE IX
ABLATION STUDY OF GRAPH CONSTRUCTION STRATEGIES ON HC D ATASET (%)
TABLE X
COMPARATIVE EXPERIMENTS USING K NN TO
CONSTRUCT HYPEREDGES (%)
spectral curve, but is not sensitive to the nonlinear struc-
ture and local contrast changes between dimensions. SSIM
decomposes similarity into three parts: luminance, contrast,
and structure, which is equivalent to the perceived similarity
measured in the structural manifold space, and pays more
attention to the relative changes of spectral shapes rather than
absolute diﬀerences. Therefore, SSIM can comprehensively
reﬂect the statistical dependence and structural consistency of
spectral shapes.
Ultimately, through experiments, we found that the OA of
using SSIM has improved, verifying its stronger discriminative
power and robustness. The results are shown in Table X.
F . Complexity Analysis
In order to systematically evaluate the operating eﬃciency
and computational complexity of the proposed method, we
compared and analyzed multiple algorithms from two dimen-
sions: training time and network parameter quantity (Params).
The hardware used for training was a NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090 GPU. Each experiment was repeated ten times to
eliminate random errors, and the average training time was
ﬁnally reported. As shown in Table VIII, compared with other
network architectures, the HDCGNet method proposed by us
maintains model performance while keeping its training time
and computational resource consumption within a reasonable
range, showing good computational eﬃciency and achieving
a good balance between model complexity and computational
eﬃciency. The training time and training parameter quantities
in the experiment can be seen in Table XI.
Although HDCGNet adopts multistrategy hypergraphs (pair-
wise, k-hop, and kNN), the additional computational overhead
has been strictly controlled. Since it is ﬁrst segmented into
hyperpixels, the number of subsequent nodes is signiﬁcantly
reduced. Using the SLIC algorithm, the complexity is
O
 
N· log N

where N is the number of pixels.
During the process of generating hyperedges, the computa-
tional overhead is as follows.
1) K-Hop Hyperedge: Generated by BFS/DFS based on
adjacency matrix, with a complexity of O(N· k).
2) kNN Hyperedge: Based on the precalculated SSIM dis-
tance matrix (O( N2· d)), perform the top-K search
(O(N· log k)).
3) Paired Hyperedges: Directly transformed from the basic
adjacency matrix, with a complexity of O(E).
The total complexity is approximately O(N2· d + N·
log k + N· k), where N is the number of hyperpixels (much
less than the number of pixels H × W). Since the image
is segmented into hyperpixels rather than individual pixels,
the total cost is still very low compared with CNN feature
extraction, and the overall overhead is controllable and can be
ignored.
The complexity of hypergraph convolution during the train-
ing process can be regarded as the HGNNConv layer. The
computational complexity of each layer is approximately
O (E + N· F)
similar to the standard GCN convolution, where E is the
number of hyperedges and F is the feature dimension. The
overall complexity is comparable to that of GCN, without
introducing excessive additional overhead.
G. Visualization Analysis of the Training Process
As shown in Fig. 20, in order to evaluate the convergence
and stability of the model, we plotted the loss function curve
during the training process. The loss function curve indicates
that as the number of training rounds increases, both the
training loss and the validation loss show a downward trend
and eventually stabilize, suggesting that the model has the
best generalization ability at this point. The gap between the
two curves is small, indicating that the model does not show
signiﬁcant overﬁtting. The shaded area represents the standard
deviation of multiple random seeds, and the narrower the
shade, the better the stability of the model.
Second, to evaluate the quality of the feature representation
learned by the model, we used the t-SNE dimensionality
reduction technique to visualize the high-dimensional feature
space onto a 2-D plane. To enhance the visual clarity and
reduce the computational load, we display all the valid pixels.
As shown in the visualized graph in Fig. 21, each point
represents a test set pixel, and its color corresponds to the
real class label. The spatial distance between points reﬂects
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
TABLE XI
RUNNING TIME AND PARAMETER SIZE OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON HC, NF, AND UP D ATASETS
Fig.
18. OA under diﬀerent epochs on each dataset.
Fig.
19. OA under diﬀerent learning rates on each dataset.
Fig.
20. Average loss curves on each dataset. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
the similarity of the category probability distribution output
by the model.
Fig. 21. t-SNE visualization on each dataset. (a) HC. (b) NF. (c) UP.
H. Discussion on the Computational Cost of Hypergraphs
We conducted a detailed analysis of the confusion matrix
of the model to determine the mineral categories that are
most likely to be misclassiﬁed, and discussed the reasons
for misclassiﬁcation from the spectral feature level and the
topological structure level, respectively. Among them, the
main misclassiﬁed categories are as follows.
In the HC dataset, prehnite and serpentine are more likely
to be misclassiﬁed. In the NF dataset, mg-carbonate and
serpentine are more likely to be misclassiﬁed. In the UP
dataset, bassanite, low-ca pyroxene, and plagioclase are more
likely to be misclassiﬁed.
The main reasons for our analysis of misclassiﬁcation are
as follows.
1) Reasons at the Spectral Level: The spectra of the mis-
classiﬁed minerals are highly similar. The absorption bands of
these misclassiﬁed minerals almost completely overlap with
those of other minerals in certain bands. As can be seen from
Fig. 8, their reﬂectance curves highly overlap in these bands,
resulting in a relatively low spectral resolution. Therefore,
the main reason for misclassiﬁcation is the excessively high
spectral similarity, which makes it diﬃcult to distinguish
adjacent categories during the feature extraction stage.
2) Topological Reasons: The secondary cause comes from
the boundary uncertainty of SLIC segmentation, which leads
to blurring of the hyperpixel boundaries, especially in the
transitional regions where two minerals coexist. The mixed
pixels within these regions may be classiﬁed as the same
hyperpixel node, thereby introducing local structural noise into
the hypergraph structure. However, the multistrategy hyper-
edge construction proposed in this article can connect adjacent
regions through spectral and spatial joint similarity, which can
alleviate this problem to a certain extent.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a parallel feature fusion network
that integrates CNN and GCN for HSI classiﬁcation, which
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5512519 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026
includes two branches (i.e., CNN branch and GCN branch)
and a feature fusion module (i.e., ACAFM). First, the CNN
branch is employed to extract multiscale features, aiming
to capture pixel-level features with diﬀerentiated receptive
ﬁelds through a multiscale feature extraction strategy. The
DDR transform is incorporated to achieve eﬃcient DDR of
spectral features. Meanwhile, the CMC module is utilized
to extract feature representations in the spatial–spectral joint
domain by means of multikernel convolution. Second, a spe-
cial GCN branch architecture is designed, which constructs a
hypergraph based on three diﬀerent hyperedge construction
strategies and introduces it into GCN. By integrating the
inherent spatial topological structure and spectral features
of the segmented region, a joint hypergraph representation
model is constructed, and hyperpixel-level deep features with
semantic consistency are extracted. Finally, ACAFM uses
cross-attention to realize feature interaction between the two
branches. The HDCGNet proposed in this article can eﬀec-
tively aggregate spatial–spectral multilevel contextual features
at both the pixel and hyperpixel levels, thereby signiﬁcantly
enhancing the classiﬁcation performance of HSIs. Comparative
experiments on three Mars benchmark HSI datasets show that
HDCGNet outperforms existing advanced methods in both
feature representation learning and cross-level feature fusion.
Although the current method has achieved good classiﬁca-
tion results in the experimental dataset, we are still committed
to further optimizing the performance and eﬃciency of the
model. Future research work will focus on the following
directions.
1) Hypergraph Sparsiﬁcation and Adaptive Pruning: Future
research will investigate eﬃcient hypergraph sparsiﬁcation
and adaptive edge selection strategies to reduce redundant
connections while preserving topological consistency. This
direction can signiﬁcantly reduce computational complexity
and memory cost, enabling real-time processing of large-scale
Mars HSI data.
2) Knowledge Distillation for Lightweight Deployment: We
plan to explore knowledge distillation from the dual-branch
HDCGNet to a single-branch lightweight student model. The
goal is to retain the discriminative spectral–spatial represen-
tation power of the teacher model while improving inference
eﬃciency on resource-constrained Mars exploration hardware.
3) Multigranularity Alignment and Enhancement: Before
feature interaction, design a coarse-to-ﬁne feature alignment
module. First, the pixel features are initially aggregated and
aligned within the hyperpixel region. Then, through the
iterative propagation of the graph neural network, the cor-
rected semantic information of the hyperpixels is fed back to
the pixel-level features, forming a bidirectional and iterative
reﬁnement process.
4) Adaptive Homophily-Aware Graph Learning [53]: We
intend to explore adaptive homophily-aware graph learning.
This could be realized through a learnable homophily coeﬃ-
cient that modulates edge weights or even dynamically prunes
and adds hyperedges, which would enable the GCN branch
to adaptively emphasize semantically meaningful connections
while suppressing noisy or spurious links, particularly in
regions with mixed pixels or transitional mineral zones.
5) Unsupervised Image Clustering: We plan to explore
unsupervised graph learning clustering methods for HSIs to
further reduce the model’s reliance on scarce labeled sam-
ples. By jointly learning node representations and clustering
assignments in a graph structure, the model can uncover the
inherent similarities between spectral–spatial features in an
unsupervised manner. An adaptive graph construction strategy
can be introduced to dynamically adjust the node connection
relationships and clustering granularity, thereby discovering
region structures with semantic consistency.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Jia et al., “EDR-TransUnet: Integrating enhanced dual relation-
attention with transformer U-Net for multiscale rock segmentation on
Mars,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no.
4601416.
[2] Y . Xiong, X. Xiao, M. Yao, H. Liu, H. Yang, and Y . Fu, “MarsFormer:
Martian rock semantic segmentation with transformer,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4600612.
[3] E. Xie, N. Chen, J. Peng, W. Sun, Q. Du, and X. You, “Semantic and
spatial–spectral feature fusion transformer network for the classiﬁcation
of hyperspectral image,” CAAI Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 1308–1322, 2023.
[4] J. Peng et al., “Low-rank and sparse representation for hyperspectral
image processing: A review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 10–43, Mar. 2022.
[5] E. Allender and T. F. Stepinski, “Automatic, exploratory mineralogical
mapping of CRISM imagery using summary product signatures,” Icarus,
vol. 281, pp. 151–161, Jan. 2017.
[6] J. A. Caggiano, A. M. Sessa, J. J. Wray, and C. S. Paty, “Application
of machine learning to identify surface minerals in CRISM imagery,”
in Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. (LPSC), 2019, p. 2564.
[7] B. Xi et al., “MCTGCL: Mixed CNN–transformer for Mars hyperspec-
tral image classiﬁcation with graph contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5503214.
[8] M. Jiang et al., “GraphGST: Graph generative structure-aware trans-
former for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5504016.
[9] Y . Su, L. Gao, A. Plaza, X. Sun, M. Jiang, and G. Yang, “SRViT:
Self-supervised relation-aware vision transformer for hyperspectral
unmixing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 10,
pp. 17585–17598, Oct. 2025.
[10] X. Yue, A. Liu, N. Chen, S. Xia, J. Yue, and L. Fang,
“HyperMLL: Toward robust hyperspectral image classiﬁcation with
multisource label learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
2024, Art. no. 5526515.
[11] C. Zhao et al., “Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation with multi-
attention transformer and adaptive superpixel segmentation-based active
learning,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 3606–3621, 2023.
[12] X. Ma et al., “Urban feature extraction within a complex urban area
with an improved 3D-CNN using airborne hyperspectral data,” Remote
Sens., vol. 15, no. 4, p. 992, Feb. 2023.
[13] L. Zhang and L. Zhang, “Artiﬁcial intelligence for remote sensing
data analysis: A review of challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 270–294, Jun. 2022.
[14] X. Kang, B. Deng, P. Duan, X. Wei, and S. Li, “Self-supervised
spectral–spatial transformer network for hyperspectral oil spill
mapping,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no.
5507410.
[15] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y . Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709, Sep.
2019.
[16] R. Achanta, A. Shaji, K. Smith, A. Lucchi, P. Fua, and S. S ¨usstrunk,
“SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2274–2282,
Nov. 2012.
[17] S. Wan, C. Gong, P. Zhong, B. Du, L. Zhang, and J. Yang,
“Multiscale dynamic graph convolutional network for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 3162–3177, May 2020.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TIAN et al.: HDCGNet: A HYPERGRAPH DUAL-BRANCH CNN–GCN NETWORK 5512519
[18] F. Luo, T. Zhou, J. Liu, T. Guo, X. Gong, and J. Ren, “Multiscale
diﬀ-changed feature fusion network for hyperspectral image change
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no.
5502713.
[19] Z. Gong, W. Hu, X. Du, P. Zhong, and P. Hu, “Deep manifold embedding
for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
no. 10, pp. 10430–10443, Oct. 2022.
[20] W. Hu, Y . Huang, L. Wei, F. Zhang, and H. Li, “Deep convolutional
neural networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” J. Sensors,
vol. 2015, no. 1, 2015, Art. no. 258619.
[21] W. Hu, Y . Huang, L. Wei, F. Zhang, and H. Li, “Deep convolutional
neural networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” J. Sensors,
vol. 2015, pp. 1–12, Aug. 2015.
[22] H. Lee and H. Kwon, “Going deeper with contextual CNN for hyper-
spectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 4843–4855, Oct. 2017.
[23] Y . Wang, Z. Xue, M. Jia, Z. Liu, and H. Su, “Hypergraph convolutional
network with multiple hyperedges fusion for hyperspectral image clas-
siﬁcation under limited samples,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5526318.
[24] Z. Zhong, J. Li, Z. Luo, and M. Chapman, “Spectral–spatial residual
network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: A 3-D deep learn-
ing framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 2,
pp. 847–858, Feb. 2018.
[25] S. K. Roy, S. Manna, T. Song, and L. Bruzzone, “Attention-
based adaptive spectral–spatial kernel ResNet for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9,
pp. 7831–7843, Sep. 2021.
[26] J. Xu et al., “FusGAT: Graph attention-based fusion network for unsu-
pervised hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 1–5, 2025.
[27] Y . Ding, X. Zhao, Z. Zhang, W. Cai, and N. Yang, “Multiscale graph
sample and aggregate network with context-aware learning for hyper-
spectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 4561–4572, 2021.
[28] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, and A. Casanova, “Graph attention
networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, p. 12.
[29] X. Han, Z. Jiang, Y . Liu, J. Zhao, Q. Sun, and J. Liu, “Semi-supervised
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation based on multiscale spectral–spatial
graph attention network,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21,
pp. 1–5, 2024.
[30] Q. Liu, L. Xiao, J. Yang, and Z. Wei, “CNN-enhanced graph con-
volutional network with pixel- and superpixel-level feature fusion for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 8657–8671, Oct. 2021.
[31] X. Ma et al., “A lightweight hybrid convolutional neural network for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5513714.
[32] Y . Zheng, S. Liu, and L. Bruzzone, “An attention-enhanced feature
fusion network (AeF 2N) for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[33] S. Dong et al., “Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation method based on
data expansion and consistency regularization with small samples,”IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 1–5, 2025.
[34] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y . Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[35] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, and Q. Hu, “ECA-Net: Eﬃcient
channel attention for deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , Jun. 2020,
pp. 11534–11542.
[36] Y . Cui, Z. Yu, J. Han, S. Gao, and L. Wang, “Dual-triple attention
network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation using limited training
samples,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[37] Y . Yang et al., “Semi-supervised multiscale dynamic graph con-
volution network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6806–6820,
May 2024.
[38] H. Wang, P. Zhuang, X. Zhang, and J. Li, “DBMGNet: A dual-
branch mamba-GCN network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no.
4410517.
[39] J. Chen, L. Jiao, X. Liu, L. Li, F. Liu, and S. Yang, “Automatic
graph learning convolutional networks for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5520716.
[40] A. Qin, Z. Shang, J. Tian, Y . Wang, T. Zhang, and Y . Y . Tang,
“Spectral–spatial graph convolutional networks for semisupervised
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 241–245, Feb. 2019.
[41] Z. Ma, Z. Jiang, and H. Zhang, “Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation using
feature fusion hypergraph convolution neural network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517314.
[42] Y . Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y . Gao, “Hypergraph neu-
ral networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019,
pp. 3558–3565.
[43] Y . Duan, F. Luo, M. Fu, Y . Niu, and X. Gong, “Classiﬁcation via
structure-preserved hypergraph convolution network for hyperspectral
image,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, 2023, Art. no.
5507113.
[44] Q. Xu, S. Xu, J. Liu, and L. Huang, “Dynamic hypergraph convolu-
tion and recursive gated convolution fusion network for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5,
2023.
[45] C. Shi, D. Liao, and L. Wang, “Hybrid CNN-GCN network for hyper-
spectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 18, pp. 10530–10546, 2025.
[46] H. Z. Z. W. X. G. H. Zhou, F. Luo, and Z. Lin, “Attention multihop graph
and multiscale convolutional fusion network for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, 2023, Art.
no. 5508614.
[47] C. Yu, S. Zhou, M. Song, B. Gong, E. Zhao, and C.-I. Chang,
“Unsupervised hyperspectral band selection via hybrid graph convolu-
tional network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art.
no. 5530515.
[48] S. K. Roy, G. Krishna, S. R. Dubey, and B. B. Chaudhuri, “HybridSN:
Exploring 3-D–2-D CNN feature hierarchy for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 277–281, Feb. 2020.
[49] L. Sun, G. Zhao, Y . Zheng, and Z. Wu, “Spectral–spatial feature
tokenization transformer for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, Jan. 2022,
Art. no. 5522214.
[50] Z. Li, Z. Xue, Q. Xu, L. Zhang, T. Zhu, and M. Zhang, “SPFormer: Self-
pooling transformer for few-shot hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no.
5502019.
[51] Y . Li, Y . Luo, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, and B. Du, “MambaHSI:
Spatial–spectral mamba for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no.
5524216.
[52] S. Liu, C. Fu, Y . Duan, X. Wang, and F. Luo, “Spatial–spectral
enhancement and fusion network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation
with few labeled samples,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63,
2024, Art. no. 5502414.
[53] Y . Ding et al., “Adaptive homophily clustering: Structure homophily
graph learning with adaptive ﬁlter for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5510113.
Authorized licensed use limited to: YUNTECH-National Yunlin Univ of Science and Tech. Downloaded on June 07,2026 at 08:41:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 